Piloted and revised Foundational HPC course (#187)
UNIVERSE-HPC/course-material: high_performance_computing/computer_simulations/03_towards_future.md

## Future of Supercomputing - the Exascale

So what does the future of supercomputing look like? Much of the current research and development in HPC is focused on Exascale computing.

For HPC architectures, this can be taken to mean working towards a system with a floating point performance of at least 1 Exaflop/s (i.e. 1018 or a million million million floating point calculations per second).

In 2016, the US government announced the Exascale Computing Project, which aims to have its first supercomputer operating at 1 Exaflop/s or more in production by 2021. If past trends in the Top500 list had been followed, then a 1 Exaflop/s system would have been expected in 2018 – the fact that this date will be missed by at least 2 or 3 years is a measure of the technical challenges involved, both in the hardware and software.

As of 2022 exascale has only been achieved by one system [https://www.top500.org/system/180047/](Frontier) based at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Although at some level this is just an arbitrary number, it has become a significant technological (and political) milestone.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2022 saw the first exascale system, [https://www.top500.org/system/180047/](Frontier), based at Oak Ridge National Laboratory, with 2 more exascale systems, Aurora and El Capitan - both also in the US, following in 2024. Although at some level this is just an arbitrary number, it has become a significant technological (and political) milestone and more machines will follow in the near future as computing needs continue to grow.
```

Some of the main barriers to building a useful and economically viable Exascale machine are:

### Hardware speeds

Since around 2006, there has been little significant increase in the clock frequency of processors. The only way to extract more performance from computers has been through more parallelism, by having more cores per chip, and by making each cores capable of more floating point operations per second. Without a fundamental move away from the current silicon technology, there is no real prospect of significantly higher clock frequencies in the next 5-10 years. There is also not much prospect of reducing network latencies by very much either. On the plus side, new memory designs such as 3D stacked memory, do promise some increases in memory bandwidth.

### Energy consumption

> If we were to build a 1 Exaflop/s computer today, using standard Intel Xeon processors, then it would consume around 400 megawatts of power: that’s enough electricity for 700,000 households, or about 1% of the UK’s entire electricity generating capacity! That’s not only hugely expensive, but it would require a big investment in engineering infrastructure, and would be politically challenging from a carbon footprint point of view.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If we were to build a 1 Exaflop/s computer today, using standard Intel Xeon processors, then it would consume around 400 megawatts of power: that’s enough electricity for 700,000 households, or about 1% of the UK’s entire electricity generating capacity!
That’s not only hugely expensive, but it would require a big investment in engineering infrastructure, and would be politically challenging from a carbon footprint point of view.
There are also plans to use waste heat from supercomputers as heating for homes, or for direct energy recovery which could substantially decrease the cost and environmental impact of running these scales of machines.
```

## Artificial Intelligence

What we’ve covered in the course is the use of supercomputers in computational science, for example to simulate the weather.

The basic approaches to tackling problems like this using computer simulation have been known for some time, and parallelising on a supercomputer enables us to run very detailed simulations to greatly improve the accuracy of our predictions. Although the mathematics can be very complicated, the computer implementation is rather mechanical. We apply a set of rules to a large number of grid-points over and over again to advance the simulation through time: the much simpler traffic model is a very good analogy to the overall process.

### Artificial Intelligence

Although these approaches have been very successful across a wide range of problems, there are other areas where they don’t yield such good results. These tend to be in tasks that a bit fuzzier to define – tasks that humans actually find very simple – such as recognising faces, understanding speech or driving a car. Great strides have been made in recent years through advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI).

### Neural Networks

> AI takes a rather different approach: rather than writing a separate program for each problem, you write software that can learn how to solve a much more general problem. This can be done by creating an artificial neural network which takes an input (such as an image of a face) and produces an output (such as “that looks like David”). We first train the network on a set of known results (e.g. a set of passport photos that have already been identified by a human), and then apply the trained network to the unknown input to get useful results (e.g. “this person is David because he looks like David’s passport photo”). This is called “Machine Learning”.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI takes a rather different approach: rather than writing a separate program for each problem, you write software that can learn how to solve a much more general problem. This can be done by creating an artificial neural network which takes an input (such as an image of a face) and produces an output (such as “that looks like David”).
We first train the network on a set of known results (e.g. a set of passport photos that have already been identified by a human), and then apply the trained network to the unknown input to get useful results (e.g. “this person is David because he looks like David’s passport photo”).
All neural networks work on this basic principle of pattern recognition whether it is recognising subjects in images, trends in data, or predicting the next word(s) in a sequence (LLMs).
This is called “Machine Learning”.
```

It’s very important to recognise that, although neural networks are inspired by the way the human brain is organised as a set of connected neurons, we are not simulating the brain. The Blue Brain project is building computer models of real brains: this is in order to understand how the human brain works, not to create a synthetic AI human. Neural networks are designed to solve particular tasks that the human brain can do very easily, but using completely synthetic neural networks that look nothing like the real human brain.

### What has this got to do with Supercomputing?

> Neural networks have been around for a long time, but recent advances in computer hardware have enabled them to be large enough and fast enough to begin to tackle problems that were previously impossible to address. The combination of modern Machine Learning software and powerful computers has come to be called Deep Learning. It is also a very parallelisable problem: if I have to train my network on 1000 known images, each image can be processed independently on a separate CPU-core. We are starting to see people designing and building supercomputers specifically targeted at Deep Learning. It turns out that GPUs are very well suited to AI problems, and Google has even designed its own “TPU” (Tensor Processing Unit) processor specifically targeted at Deep Learning problems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Neural networks have been around for a long time, but only recent advances in computer hardware have enabled them to be large enough and fast enough to begin to tackle problems that were previously impossible to address. The combination of modern Machine Learning software and powerful computers has come to be called Deep Learning. It is also a very parallelisable problem: if I have to train my network on 1000 known images, each image can be processed independently on a separate CPU-core. We are starting to see people designing and building supercomputers specifically targeted at Deep Learning. GPUs, with their extreme parallel nature, are very well suited to machine learning problems, and Google has even designed its own “TPU” (Tensor Processing Unit) processor specifically targeted at Deep Learning problems.
```
